right so this talk is about
strange stars or quark stars and
strangelets
another title for it and it's
about some quite advanced
ideas about some of what particle
physics might have to say
about the possibilities of
stars that are denser even
than the neutron stars that result
from supernovae and so
just to begin at the beginning
ordinary matter is made of
different atoms of different elements
and each element has different
properties
as a result of different numbers of
electrons
that orbit around the nucleus so the
structure of an atom is
a very dense little nucleus in the
center
positively charged containing protons
and a few neutrons as well just to make
up the numbers
the uncharged neutrons help to stop
the nucleus falling apart due to the
fact that all of the
positively charged protons like to repel
each other so they act as glue
and then you have a balancing number
usually of electrons going around the
outside of the nucleus to make up a
neutral atom
now here's some diagrams of
the nuclei of different elements just to
point out that the number of neutrons
that you can have in different elements
can vary
so i've got uh protons drawn as little
red balls
neutrons as blue and the tiny little
light weights the electrons with
negative charges green
so for the first element in the periodic
table the lightest one
hydrogen you can have it in three
different forms in nature
you can have hydrogen one which is
just a single proton with in the nucleus
with an electron going around it
or you can have deuterium where you have
a an
extra neutron or you can have tritium
where there are three particles two
neutrons and one proton
but in every case the critical factor is
the nucleus has
one positive charge and therefore one
electron orbits around in the atom
we go to helium the second element you
can again have
multiple versions of it the two that we
find in nature
are helium three where there are
two protons in a neutron and helium four
where there are two of each
again because there are always two
protons that's what makes it helium
it has two electrons going around it
and the next one is lithium so again
we'll always have three protons
and three electrons but you can either
have lithium six
with three neutrons or lithium seven the
heavier version with four neutrons in
there
so that last number tells you how many
of these particles there are
and the name of the element tells you
how many protons there are if you can
remember them all
but we talk about stars in particular we
often
say that they're giant balls of gas and
we've told a lie
immediately because they're not really
gas they're made of a space of matter
called plasma
and this has to do with the electrons
in the atoms you know in a solid
all the atoms line up in a nice grid
often in our sort of making a crystal
and they're all jostling right hard next
to each other
um in a nice uh structured way
if you heat solids up and melt them into
a liquid you give the
atoms more energy they tend to be able
to
flow past each other they've got enough
energy that they don't
stick together rigidly like a solid does
but they are still held
more or less together so you get the
liquid
staying in one droplet for example
it causes things like surface tension
and other effects
heated up some more and the atoms now
gain enough energy to
break those weak bonds and the atoms
or molecules move around completely
independently and we have a gas
the third state of matter but if you
heat it even more
you get it up to three four five
thousand degrees
then the electrons can't stick to the
atoms
anymore they get ripped away
and it's called ionization you create a
charged
ion by taking one or more electrons away
but actually in a plasma you've taken
all of the electrons
off of the nuclei so the nuclei the
positively charged
uh heavy lumps are sort of floating
around in a sea
of highly rapidly moving electrons that
are not attached to any particular atom
and that's really what stars are made of
so we we should probably tell people
that
but as we've talked about several times
in these lectures
when a star reaches the end of its life
and it runs out of the fuel that's
powering its
nuclear fusion and stopping it from
collapsing under gravity
then gravity can take over and for
fairly massive stars more than around 11
times the mass
of our sun the collapse
of the star is inevitable and it will
collapse
down and form a thing called a neutron
star
smaller stars form white dwarfs but
we've talked about them in another
lecture but i have to cover neutron
stars here just as part of the
introduction to what comes next
inside a neutron star the pressure of
this collapsed core
is so enormous that the plasma the
electrons
and the protons and the nuclei are
forced back together so hard that the
electrons and protons are forced to
combine with each
other to create more neutrons and so
all the electrons and protons get
converted
and we end up with a ball of neutrons
and
it's immensely dense you end up with
about
the mass of our sun compressed into the
size of new york city around about 20
kilometers across
and it can be anything from one or
perhaps
double the mass of our sun the density
is the same as the density of that
nucleus in the atom
most of the space in a occupied by a
normal atom is occupied by the electron
cloud
in fact the nucleus is a tiny tiny tiny
lump in the center as rutherford
discovered
and so a sugar cube lump size
of neutron star would weigh 1 billion
tons so a trillion kilograms
it's unbelievably dense
and as i said it got created by the
immense
pressure and high temperature the
temperature inside the
core of a collapsing star can be
billions and billions of degrees kelvin
or centigrade it makes no difference
really at this level
and the pressure can be just
unbelievable so it squeezes the
electrons and the protons together
so here we have my little green electron
negative
combining with the positive proton to
form a neutral
neutron now
under normal conditions on earth if you
had a free neutron
it would go the other way it would turn
back into a proton and electron
over the course of about 10 minutes they
have a half life as we call it
half of them on average will decay back
to protons and electrons in 10 minutes
because neutrons on their own are not
normally stable
but the pressure and temperature here is
so great
it forces this nuclear reaction to go
the other way
and the reason is it saves space because
rather than having the two particles and
in particular
the very high speed electrons
where they're very low mass and so they
have to move at a very high
speed to carry the same temperature
so you save a lot of space if you get
rid of them and
space is everything when gravity is
crushing it
and so you could say that the center of
these neutron stars is a ball of
element number zero neutronium
they've got mass of one and an electric
charge of zero so
it's the zeroth element of the periodic
table
now we can't make it here on earth um as
i said the density
4 times 10 to the power 17 so
4 with 17 zeros after it kilograms
per cubic meter whereas uh i think
the densest material on earth is
probably got 22 000
kilograms per cubic meter and that's the
metal osmium
and so but if we just had
neutronium free neutrons
on earth without the immense pressure
then they would form a gas
and be 27 times lighter than air they'd
be lighter even than hydrogen
and uh amazingly different
and they would remain a gas almost all
the way down to absolute zero
but as i said they can't because they
decay within 10 minutes or so
however under the conditions inside the
center of one of these neutron stars
this neutronium can exist
we've tried making neutronium in the in
the lab in particle accelerators
by sticking neutrons together in various
ways or by
bombarding heavier elements like um
element number four beryllium with
neutrons until it falls apart
and we've detected the dye neutron two
of them stuck together
and uh we're fairly sure that that can
exist
again tends to fall apart quite quickly
we've also got some evidence of tetra
neutrons being created four stuck
together
but there are theoretical reasons why a
tri-neutron wouldn't be
anywhere near as stable and we've never
seen those
but again all of these are unstable
under earthly conditions
anyway so what's going on inside the
neutron star is a little bit of
quantum mechanics called the poorly
exclusion principle which says that
any of these particles like protons
neutrons or electrons
which are all spin one half particles
of a class called fermions doesn't
really matter they're all these
these not normal particles
can't be squeezed so into
uh so that two of them sit in the same
quantum
energy state the same quantum box
and so i've got a little diagram here
and we've got
space going horizontally left to right
with our little neutrons sat in some of
the boxes
in the bottom row there and the higher
rows
are higher energy states where the
neutron would be
whizzing about bouncing around inside
the box
with more energy but still contained in
and so for this particular distribution
we've got one
neutron in each of the lowest possible
energy states and in fact a couple of
spares
so we're all right this is a nice low
energy situation
but in a neutron star gravity squeezes
the size of the neutron star down so the
amount of space
that the neutrons have to exist in is
very restricted and we can represent
that by taking
the away most of the horizontal
um columns or the vertical columns
reducing the horizontal width like this
so gravity has crushed us down to a
smaller size
represented now it's only got two
quantum boxes across
and so our neutrons have all had to move
and stack up
into higher energy boxes because they
can't all
uh sit in the bottom lowest energy state
because you're not allowed to have more
than one in a box
and so we have to give each of the
higher rows there more and more energy
and that means that there is a
resistance
to gravity doing this it's having to
push
up the energy hill to force the neutrons
into these
higher energy boxes and so that creates
a resistance which
halts the collapse at a state where
a lot of the higher energy states are
filled
nevertheless because the gravity is so
strong
but you reach an equilibrium point where
gravity can't squeeze any more because
it doesn't have the uh
the power to push a another neutron or
another set of neutrons
in this case it would have to lift what
is it six of them
all up into higher and higher energy
states if it tried to crush
this down to only having one column
and so the curious thing about neutron
stars is that
as you add more mass to them they
get smaller and more dense because
gravity becomes stronger there's more
material so there's more gravity
and so it's able to squeeze the quantum
boxes
away and elevate the neutrons to higher
and higher energy states
effectively increasing the temperature
um
at the cons the cost of squeezing them
together more
and so rather
contrary to normal stars where more
massive stars tend to be bigger
neutron stars get smaller as you
increase the mass but
push comes to shove when you get just
over two solar masses and we're not
exactly sure
whether it's two and a half or three but
it's somewhere in that region
with a diameter around about 17
kilometers
the uh then the uh something has to give
because what we find is that we've
reached
a limit called the tolman oppenheimer
volkov limit after
three physicist mathematicians that
managed to calculate it
for first time this is because those
quantum boxes don't live in a quite a
regular grid that i drew in my diagram
in fact
the boxes get progressively
less and less in height as you move
up the diagram and so you get
gain less energy by squeezing
as things go on and so eventually the
squeeze from gravity
uh can't be overcome
and what we normally say at this point
to our beginners and our young
astronomers and so on is
and then gravity crushes everything down
and you
end up with a black hole because you've
exceeded this uh
tov limit at around about two to three
solar masses
two and a half to three
but it's not quite necessarily true and
this is where the story turns
uh into a little bit of particle physics
again
inside our neutrons and protons we find
that they have deeper structure
they are not uh fundamental particles
but they are composed of quarks
now each of them has three quarks in
a proton has two up quarks and one
down quark the up and down are just made
up
names and
the neutron has one up and two downs
and you can see that the up quarks have
plus
two-thirds of an electric charge and the
downs have
minus one-third so for the proton we've
got
two lots of two-thirds positive so
that's four-thirds positive
minus a third for the down quark
so we get plus three thirds plus one
a positively charged proton with plus
one electric charge
whereas the neutron has two lots of the
minus a third for the downs and only one
plus two thirds for an up and so it ends
up with a charge of
zero that explains why they have those
particular charges and how
they they get put together
and normally the three quarks
bounce around inside the neutron and the
proton quite happily
carrying what's a lot of the energy in
their motion within the neutron
proton um and there's a certain amount
of empty space in there so you know what
i'm going to say
which is that gravity once it reaches
that
tolman oppenheimer volkov limit
can cause the structure of the
neutrons and protons to be crushed out
of existence
and the space between the quarks can be
eliminated
and you end up with what's called
technically quark soup
so rather than having the quarks convul
confined in their little trios they end
up just
as a giant mass of them separately
flowing around with very much less space
between them and so perhaps a
two mass a two solar mass neutron star
can undergo this
deconfinement process where the quarks
are no longer confined
within their individual protons or
neutrons
neutrons in this case and you end up
with
some energy being released and a 1.5
solar mass quark star
a lot of the energy gets carried away in
um
neutrinos that are created as well that
will come on to
and of course now the situation is that
the quark
star can shrink to a smaller size
and it can find a new equilibrium
because it's all now about quarks in
boxes
what we have is a soup of up and down
quarks
illustrated here now by the red and blue
circles
but because they are different we're
allowed to put
one of each in our quantum boxes
unlike the neutrons or the protons where
only one can go in there
we can have now one up and one down
quark in each of our quantum states
they ignore each other completely and so
they're operating independently
and we're allowed to put two or one or
zero
but we can't have two the same we
couldn't have two
two ups or two downs in a box we can
have one of each though
but this does mean that we can fit more
quarks across the bottom
in the lowest energy state
but again when we squeeze it with
gravity
we end up pushing it together
and having to populate higher states
because we can still only put
two one of each in each box and so we
end up with a situation something like
this
where the quarks populate all the rows
fully with a pair one up and one down
until we get to the very top the highest
energy state where we just get the odd
ones left over
and this again costs energy and
there's a resistance of pressure pushing
back
and this is what stops the quark star
that we now have
collapsing further under gravity and so
it creates a new equilibrium state
smaller and denser and
than the neutron star was
and but based exactly on the same
principles
except there's a further wrinkle
which is that there are more types of
quark
in the universe possible than just up
quarks
and down quarks there are so-called
strange quarks
and they don't exist within normal
matter
they don't find them inside neutrons and
protons and
ordinary nuclei they're considerably
more massive
than their up and down partners
and cost a lot more energy to make and
so they decay
under normal conditions back to either
up or down quarks
and so rather as neutrons do if you have
them
uh under normal conditions
then they fall apart quite quickly but
they were discovered because
they stop the particles in which they
exist don't fall apart as quickly as
normal random heavy particles that
created in particle accelerators
when physicists were studying this in
the 1950s
initially they discovered certain types
of uh
heavy particle that they could create in
their particle accelerators
most of them would decay in a tiny
fraction of a second about
10 to the minus 20 of a second
unbelievably quick
but there were some that hung around for
10 to the minus 10 of a second so 10
orders of magnitude
longer life and these were the strange
particles they called them
and it turns out that they are ones that
contain these
quasi-stable strange quarks
so they're not totally unstable but they
are
uh they don't normally hang around for
very long
and the one of the first particles to be
discovered that contained a
as one of these strange quarks was the
lambda particle
an analysis of it in the end revealed
that it contained three quarks just like
a neutron or a proton
it was kind of a heavy equivalent of uh
the neutron
where one of the down quarks had been
turned into
a strange quark so it had more mass and
would
ultimately decay but it was
semi-stable
and the
curious thing about that which we'll
come on to is that
you can actually group together larger
numbers of of uh
these uh lambda particles into
lumps of matter containing more than the
three
ordinary types of quarks
if they contain up and down and strange
then
we call them strangelets and so a lambda
particle is the smallest possible
strangelet
but having a third quark available to
our quark star
is super because if we can convert
some of our down quarks into strange
quarks which are now shown here here
in green in the mixture of our quarks in
boxes
we can now put one of each of three
types into the lowest energy state
and so we can get more quarks in more
low energy boxes
and the same thing happens that when you
try to squeeze them we can now fill
three quarks into each of the states
and we don't have to go as far up the
energy ladder
and so in fact this is a better
lower energy situation because of this
not having to force things up the energy
tower
it turns out to be more efficient for
the um from an energy point of view
to turn some of the down quarks into
strange quarks so we have an equal
mixture of u's d's and s's
um in this high pressure environment
that turns out to be
the preferred state and so re really
quark stars very rapidly turn into
strange quark stars containing a quark
soup
of all three components
so you can call them strange quark stars
or
strange stars or strange matter stars
made up of these uh
three types all whizzing around
in their different quantum states packed
as densely together as possible
and under these conditions certainly
it's the most efficient packing that
compared to trying to just use normal
ups and downs and so
we think probably all quark stars
turn into strange stars okay
however
a couple of scientists uh bodman and
whitton
propose actually that
because this gives a lower energy state
certainly in the
extremely large mass that we have in a
quark star
it turns out that the mathematics may
also
tell us that the
uds strange matter
is actually more stable than ordinary
udd or uud matter
and that matter really ought to
eventually perhaps very slowly
turn from normal matter into this
strange
uds matter and
now we know that that's not quite true
because we've made lambda particles
that's what we've got drawn here a u d
and an s makes a lambda zero
uh neutral lambda particle and we know
that these
actually go back the other way under
normal conditions
but what bodman and whitton are actually
saying is that if you pack enough of
these lambdas together
into a lump into a strangelet
like we've got here where we've got
a larger agglomeration but not the size
of a whole star just a sort of
macro sized lump of strange matter
perhaps
weighing a microgram or something then
it's still more stable to have a
microgram of strange matter than a
microgram of ordinary matter
and worse than uh than that the truly
terrifying prospect of this
would be if you made a large lump
of uh strange matter
then if it bumped into ordinary matter
we've got here a proton and a neutron
bumping into
a strangelet with uh a super used e's
and s's in it
then it's more favorable for them to
combine and form a larger strangelet
because larger strange lets us are even
more
energy efficient the larger you make
them the more energy efficient they
become
and this is a very very dangerous
prospect because
if you happen to accidentally make a
strangelet that was
large enough to be stable in its own
right
then it would eat all ordinary matter
that it came into contact with
and just make itself bigger and bigger
and bigger and so they're quite worried
about the large hadron collider because
uh the large hadron
collider there was an initial worry that
it might make a black hole
and then the black hole would eat the
earth
but as we talked about in my my talk on
stephen hawking's work he showed that
small black holes
radiate away by hawking radiation very
rapidly
and so they wouldn't have time in their
brief existence
to pick up more matter and uh
start the process of growing to the
point where they would
eat the uh the whole of switzerland
followed by eating the whole of the
earth
good job really because we turned it on
and here we still are so the theory and
the experiment have matched
however if we managed to make a
strangelet of sufficient mass to be
stable
then it would indeed turn all of the
rest of the matter in the earth
into one large strangelet and
effectively collapse it into a very
small quark star
hence the little warning sign which is
made tongue-in-cheek
danger we're making stable strangelets
you really really really do not want to
try this at home
okay well enough of the the mad theory
perhaps
other than just to say that um what put
me on to all of this was
bbc blessed that made a a tv document
drama
program called end day which talked
about various different ways that the
earth might end such as a super volcano
or an asteroid impact from space or
indeed
the brooklyn uh um
particle collider accidentally making a
strangelet one day
and indeed all of the other disasters
they looked at were
they managed to avoid in the in the
movie but the movie
ends with a strange look being created
and sucking the whole of the uh earth
down inside itself and destroying
everything
so there's a cheery thought for you
now we have in the lab
shown that we've been able to go a
little way towards this
and again i think this is very dangerous
we've added lambda particles
collided them with a lithium nucleus and
noted that the
combined heavier nucleus which uh now
has
this extra lambda neutral particle in
there
um shrank by 19
due to the presence of a bit of strange
matter
and that's the poorly exclusion
principle at work
allowing the third type of quark to make
a smaller kind of step towards a
quark star or a strangelet and i really
think these experiments shouldn't be
taken any further because it is
incredibly dangerous
are we talking complete nonsense though
we're astronomers not these mad particle
physicists
so we should go look and see if there's
any evidence
so have we managed to find anything have
we found any quark star
candidates we would tell the difference
because
we would see them being um
very much smaller than the uh 17
kilometer
size limit of on a neutron star
that would be one option we would also
be able to tell the difference in other
ways
to do with uh temperature and mass
estimates
if we can get a mass estimate perhaps if
they're in our binary system
and we have a few candidates we have
pulsar 3c
58 which is the remains of a supernova
observed by
chinese and japanese astronomers in 1181
a.d
it's pushing out radio waves it's
spinning
we can begin to make an estimate of its
size and mass and we note that it's
spinning on its axis once every 65
milliseconds
which is very very fast indeed and
there's a strong
possibility that this is a quark star
again xte j 1739-285
one and a half solar masses 10
kilometers across
spinning over 1 000 times a second
1122 rotations per second so
very small spinning incredibly fast
good candidate for being a quark star
and uh the third one there which is
supposed to say assassin if you
pronounce that the letters right
assassin 15 lh
was possibly the collapse of
a neutron star into a quark star we
think we might have caught
the transition occurring the neutron
star probably acquiring some more mass
over time of material falling back onto
it
may have tripped it over that limit the
tolman oppenheimer volkov limit
and had it collapsed down to be a quark
star
and we saw the flash coming from it
when it uh did that as about 0.5 of a
solar mass of
the of matter was converted into energy
and released
in the process
here's an image of one though that we
think is a good candidate
again it's got one of these mad catalog
numbers rx
blah blah blah at the top there and
it's uh in the southern part of the sky
corona
australis 400 light years away and
the study of it using x-ray telescopes
indicates a
temperature of 700 000 kelvin but a
diameter of
only 11 kilometers which is below that
minimum
for a neutron star but is perfect for a
strange
uh mata quark star
we also saw this supernova 2006 gy
which was originally thought to be a
type 1a supernova but the light
curve of it shown at the bottom there is
wrong
it doesn't fit the profile it's gone way
too bright and it's about a hundred
times this is a logarithmic scale
as bright as a type 1a supernova
so we think that this was perhaps the uh
collapse debt all the way down to
a quark star and the uh
explosion that resulted the release of
energy showed that in the
sort of traumatic transition perhaps
there were two neutron stars that
collided
and instead of collapsing to a black
hole
they formed a quark star and in the
flux of neutrons it built some very very
element uh heavy elements
all the way up to element number 130 or
even higher perhaps
and the the biggest number of protons
we've managed to manufacture the
highest uh element is 118 here in the
lab on earth
so the 130 was a lot further um
can only really be a storm of neutrons
that caused that so
probably two neutron stars colliding
there's even the possibility that our
friend supernova 1987a
in the large magellanic cloud
was a core collapse supernova
that went all the way through passed a
neutron star
down to a quark star because we can't
see
the neutron star there and the
characteristics just
hinted perhaps it collapsing to a
a quark star we did detect a very large
burst of neutron
of neutrinos and that'll have been the
initial
formation of the neutron star but in
studying how that burst arrived
it looks like there was a second stage
and that second burst was the formation
of the quark star
different type of neutrino as well
and just last year a year ago the
gravity wave detectors
ligo and virgo detected the merger of
two objects
gravity wave 1908 14
you can see that's actually the date
that's a very good way of doing it
of identifying this event and it was a
solar mass black hole merging with a
smaller object
of only 2.59 solar masses
and that smaller component
is more massive than that tolman
oppenheimer volkov limit
so more massive than a neutron star but
it's very very light for a black hole
they tend to
come in at five solar masses and up and
so it's quite possible that this was
the uh a quark star
and an and the 23 solar mass black hole
merging
and that we detected the gravity waves
from it
so there's quite some evidence that
these
really could be the missing link between
the neutron star at a mass of roundabout
maximum two and a half solar masses
and the smallest black holes at about
five solar masses
that form and again you would probably
have that same situation that there's
uh the process can continue where you
go beyond a neutron star to a quark star
which will probably turn into a strange
matter star straight away
but i haven't told you the rest of the
story yet which is that
nature has six types of quarks
we've only talked about ups downs and
strange quarks so far
but there are um a total of six
so this strange quark is the
second generation equivalent of the down
and it has a partner the charmed quark
which is the second generation
equivalent of the
up so the ones in the top row have plus
two thirds electric charge
and the ones in the bottom row have that
minus one-third electric
charge and the third generation well
they call they were going to call them
truth and beauty to start with
which i thought would have fitted very
nicely but the americans
have no style and called them top and
bottom
instead
using the same initial letters truth and
beauty would have been so much better
anyway they're very very massive indeed
the third generation ones
and so of course now that we've got six
types of quarks to play with if we uh go
from a strange quark star we tip a
little bucket of mass onto it you know
what's going to happen
there's a possibility that we could
utilize the
fourth type of uh quark the
charmed quark and make a charmed star
that would be even denser and more
compact than
the quark star
and possibly even bring the fifth and
sixth members that the t and b
quarks into play and make even more
compact
uh structures and so it's possible
that we might actually form these things
and they might be like a layered
structure to them
with the central dense region containing
all six types of stars and then only
five
and then four and then three and then a
quark super up and downs
and perhaps an outer crust of neutrons
and these things might in fact be a sort
of layered
structure like an onion rather
reminiscent of what happens in
some of the more giant stars with the
ordinary elements of mata
so it's a lot like going through the
periodic table
again but fusing the quarks up the
mass ladder to make these more exotic
generations
is that the end of the story well
we just really don't know at this stage
whether
quarks are fundamental some people have
suggested
maybe not and maybe there is a a whole
layer below that
uh below the quark star and they even
given it a name
prion a particle that comes
prior to the arrival of a quark
and so maybe you could get prion stars
that would be even more dense
than the neutron stars and quark stars
and some people have suggested that
perhaps these are responsible for
one or two of the highest energy gamma
rays
that we see that seem to uh arrive
on earth that uh we just can't explain
in any other way
um it'd be fantastic to be able to
discover that whether this was true or
not
we also find even more exotic states
that might exist
deep within the core of these super
dense structures
right in the densest regions just 10
centimeters across
in the middle of a
massive quark star you might find that
the temperature
and pressure has now reached conditions
similar to the very very first
fractions of a second of the big bang
that i talked about in the cosmic dawn
lecture
there the conditions are so extreme that
you can't tell the difference anymore
between electromagnetic forces
and the weak nuclear force that governs
radioactivity they become one the
electro
weak force and in such conditions quarks
in that electro weak core
would be burned into
particles called leptons well we're
familiar with leptons they're things
like electrons and neutrinos
and the mathematics tells us that nine
quarks would
burn up to give three anti-leptons and
release a whole bunch of energy
that would curry be carried away in the
form of
neutrinos and those neutrinos would
hold the core up from further collapse
down to a black hole
and this is actually reversing the
process
by which the quarks were created in
that first instant after the big bang
where the uh initially there were
a sea of these leptons the electrons and
neutrinos
and they were converted into the quarks
in the first instant of the big bang
as the energy was
forcing the expansion and driving the
universe to be bigger and cooler
whereas here the process is being
reversed gravity is winning
and crushing things out of existence
burning up these quarks
back into the leptons
and there are other mad ideas about
boson stars that could exist
these are stars that are made not of the
firemen's with
a half integer or a non-zero
spin bosons have zero spin
a quantum mechanical property of a
certain intrinsic angular momentum that
they have
and they are not subject to the poorly
exclusion principle
so they don't have to climb the energy
ladder
and so you can collapse a bunch of
bosons without it
costing you the energy and creating the
resistance now
normally that would mean if you did form
a
a big massive pile of bosons they would
collapse under gravity without restraint
and form they might go through
what you might call a boson star stage
but the collapse would be unstoppable
and they would collapse down to a black
hole
but if there are types of bosons as yet
undiscovered
that were to exhibit a self-repulsion
a bit like the poorly exclusion
principle
they would create that ladder effect and
the repulsion might
halt the collapse before we got all the
way to a black hole
now such stars would be utterly
transparent to electromagnetic radiation
they
these particles are uncharged so
light and x-rays and everything else
would go straight through them as if
they weren't there
and they could be candidates for dark
matter as that is the characteristic
thing about dark matter it has mass but
it does not
interact with electromagnetism
and so it's possible again that some of
these might have been created somehow
if such particles can exist but this is
all
entirely hypothetical and
we really are reaching out into the
extreme edges of
what is thought to be possible
here i definitely this is hypothesis not
theory we have
absolutely no evidence to back any of
this
up as occurring in the real world
um right the way through to
strange stars i think we're on
reasonably solid ground that we're
beginning to make detections of such
things which is quite surprising
but beyond that it's anyone's guess it's
all just
the mathematics says maybe
but so far whenever the mathematics has
said maybe we've generally found it to
be true
so there's nothing stranger than reality
and on that note i shall finish